# Introductie

(10 pagina's bare minimum)

## Taxonomies - Classifying life

Upon hearing the term "Animal Kingdom", you might think of either the
jungle or the stories of Reynard the Fox, where the lion rules over the
other animals as King. Or you might be reminded of any other number of
movies, music albums or television series. Often in such stories, the
comparison is made between human and animals, either assigning animal
traits to humans or featuring anthropomorphic animals.

In evolutionary biology, the term "Animal Kingdom", or rather "Kingdom
Animalia", is a classification; a grouping of organisms. It is not the
only kingdom, but perhaps it is, for us humans, the most important
one, since we are part of it. Fortunatly, despite calling it a
kingdom, there's no king we all are fealthy to. The other kingdoms are
usually the plants (Plantae), Fungi, Chromista, Protozoa, Archaea and
Bacteria. Why usually? Well, life being life, the borders between these
classifications are a rather grey area and they have been reassigned
often. In fact, the study of naming and classifying groups of organisms
is a whole branch of biology, called taxonomy. Other than discussing
about the number of kingdoms, they also subdivide kingdoms in phyla,
those in classes, those in orders, and so forth. Each group of organisms
is called a taxon and may contain any number of other taxa. kingdom,
phyla and class are called taxonomic ranks. In this work, we will be
using a taxonomy with 29 named taxonomic ranks (though at the start of
my PhD, it had only 27), but in between those are many unnamed ranks.

Each taxon is directly contained by only a single other taxon, called
its parent. All taxa together are thus structured in a tree, sometimes
called the tree of life, with the group containing all organisms as
root of the tree. The taxa containing a taxon, all the way up to the
root, are called its ancestors; and all taxa contained within a taxon
are called its descendants. Do note that this does not imply a certain
organism of which all these organisms descend (in reproductive sense),
just that they are grouped together because they are showing similar
characteristics.

One of the interesting ranks of grouping organisms is the species, near
the bottom of the taxonomic tree.

* taxonomy
  - kingdom (may have heard of the 'animal kingdom', there are others)
  - species (species is also a rank)
  - andere rangen (this making a tree of containing sets)

  - taxonomy oorspronkelijk op basis van uiterlijke kenmerken
  - nu eerder op basis van evolutie, dus: DNA

## Genetic codes

* DNA, RNA, eiwitten
  - DNA basisbouwsteen van evolutie
  - ketting van ACGT's
  - coding vs. noncoding
  - DNA -> beschrijvend, eiwit -> uitvoerend
  - translatie via RNA

## Studying genetic codes

* Studies regarding DNA/RNA/proteins
  - genomics & metagenomics
  - scanproblemen -> shotgun metagenomics (concept read) (oplijsting machines, volumes)
  - proteomics & metaproteomics
  - scanproblemen -> I/L equation
  - transcriptomics & metatranscriptomics

## Existing Metagenomics Tools

* Existing metagenomics methods/tools
  - assembly: binning werkt niet goed met meer soorten
  - meest gangbare methoden

## Unipept

* Existing metaproteomics tools
  - Unipept
